FUSETOOLS2-942 - provide blogpost on Camel K Java debug in VS Code (#529)
apache/camel-website: content/blog/2021/01/DebugInVSCodeWithCamelK1.3.0/index.md

---
title: "How to Java debug a Camel K integration in VS Code with Camel K 1.3.0"
date: 2021-01-20
authors: [apupier]
categories: ["Tooling","Camel-k"]
preview: "How to Java debug a Camel K integration in VS Code with Camel K 1.3.0"
---

Camel K 1.3.0 is providing a new feature to Java debug deployed integrations. Even if Camel K 1.3.0 is [not fully compatible](https://github.com/apache/camel-k/issues/1872) with VS Code Tooling for Apache Camel K extension, it remains possible to leverage the VS Code Java debugging capabilities.

I recorded a [video](https://youtu.be/cFPuxd1Je3c) which is following the steps in this blogpost. I let you choose you preferred way to discover how to java debug your Camel K integration in VS Code.

# Requirements

- [VS Code Extension Pack for Apache Camel](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.apache-camel-extension-pack)
- Uncheck _Camelk -> Integrations: Auto-upgrade_ in _File -> Preferences -> Settings -> Extensions -> Apache Camel K Tooling_

> - [Camel K 1.3.0 binary](https://camel.apache.org/download/#camel-k) available on command-line

Author: this needs to be fixed before https://github.com/apache/camel-k/issues/1867#issuecomment-762946290

Author: PR provided https://github.com/apache/camel-website/pull/530

Author: merged

- Open command palette _View -> Command Palette..._
- Select _Create a new Apache Camel K integration_
- Select _Java_
- Select the folder
- Provide a name, for instance _Demo_

![Create java file](./1-CreateJavaCamelKIntegration.gif)

#### Set a breakpoint

To have a breakpoint during execution of the Camel Route, as opposite at creation of the Camel Route, you need to add small piece of code. This is a classical trick for Java debugging of Camel Routes, not specific to Camel K.

The trick consists in adding a Processor between the steps you want to observe. It will be something like:

		  .process(new Processor(){
			  @Override
			  public void process(Exchange exchange) throws Exception {
				  System.out.println("can be breakpoint on this line");
			  }
		  })

Then, you can add a breakpoint to the lien by clicking in the left ruler. A red dot will appear.

![Provide breakpoint inside a Processor](./2-putBreakpoint.gif)

#### Start integration

You can then start the integration:

- Ensure the editor is still opened on the Java Integration file
- Open command palette _View -> Command Palette..._
- Select _Start Apache Camel K Integration_
- Select _Basic_

> - Check in _Apache Camel K Integrations_ view that the example is deployed successfully. it will have a green dot. On first deploy, it can take few minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check in the _Apache Camel K Integrations_ view that the example is deployed successfully. it will have a green dot. It can take few minutes for the first deployment.
```

![Start integration in basic mode](./3-startIntegration.gif)

> Nota: If starting in --dev, it will allow to automatically reload the Integration. But take care that debugger will need to be restarted on each change. Meaning that the next two steps will need to be repeated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: If starting in --dev, it will allow to automatically reload the Integration. But take care, debugger will need to be restarted on each change. Meaning that the next two steps will need to be repeated.
```

#### Start debugger on runtime

> - Open terminal _terminal -> New Terminal_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Open terminal: _terminal -> New Terminal_
```

- Call _kamel debug demo_ (replace _demo_ by the integration name that appears in _Apache Camel K Integrations_ view if you choose a different name.

![Start debugger on runtime](4-startDebuggerOnRuntime.gif)

Note: Take care to use the kamel 1.3.0 binaries.

#### Attach debugger

- In the left panel, select the _Run & Debug_ container
- Click on _create a launch.json_
- Remove the default _configuration_
- Use completion to pick the _Java: Attach_
- Provide a meaningful name
- Update port, by default Camel K is using _5005_

> - Click on green triangle to _Start debugging_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Click on the green triangle to _Start debugging_
```

![Attach debugger](5-AttachDebugger.gif)

#### Enjoy

> Now, it is time to enjoy. You can notice that you have access to the message content. It is providing a good insight on what is going on in the Camel Route.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, it is time to enjoy. You can notice that you have access to the message content. It is providing a good insight into what is going on in the Camel Route.
```
